**Artificial intelligence (AI)** is the term used to describe the use of computers to simulate critical thinking comparable to a human being. The core of these AI models are Machine Learning (ML) or Deep Learning (ML) algorithms. Both (ML and DL) algorithms are called data-driven, it means instead of defining the situation, these algorithms learn from previous examples (or experiences). Generally, by increasing the amount of the data, the accuracy of these models also increases. According to Dr. Andrew Ng, a Professor, and computer scientist from Stanford University, AI is going to change all the paradigms of our life as electricity did around 200 years ago. Currently one of the most recent advancements of AI is in three fields of medicine: Diagnosis, Prognosis, and Treatment.   

Medical Diagnosis is used for determining the disease or condition that explains the symptoms of the patient. Recently a group of researchers from Stanford University developed a Deep Learning based AI: CheXNet, that can detect 14 different diseases by analyzing the input front view chest X-ray images. To train this model researchers used an open source dataset released by ```National Institute of Health (NIH)```, this dataset contains ```112,120 frontal-view X-ray images``` of 30,805 unique patients, annotated with up to 14 different thoracic pathology labels using Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods on radiology reports. Another recent example of Medical Diagnosis AI is Deep Learning based AI models for detecting  neumonia due to COVID-19. The dataset commonly used for this work is open source chest X-ray images from Kaggle or other open-source websites. Some of the models reported an accuracy even greater than 98%. 

Medical Prognosis is used for predicting the expected development or likelihood of the disease. In 2019, a team of researchers at MIT-CSAIL successfully developed an AI model that could predict breast cancer in a person five years before its development. Based on the prediction, this model can also develop personalized treatment-recommendations for the patient. Recently researchers from Stanford University developed a Machine Learning based AI system that can predict the survival of a person in the next 5 years. The system takes input in the form of body parameters (blood pressure, age, sugar level ..etc ) and results in the survival rate of a person in the next 5 years, based on the prognosis report the model recommends the personalized cure to the person.  

Although the researchers have developed a lot of AI models for health sectors and if implemented in hospitals then it can help doctors and clinicians in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment.  But most of these models have some limitations. These models are highly accurate in labs but failed to perform better in real life. According to a report published in ```MIT technology review (on April 2020)```, google medical AI was super accurate in lab testing but the real-life story was different. Google developed a Medical diagnosis AI for detecting diabetic retinopathy, to test it in real life google got permission from Thailand's health ministry. Although it sounds impressive that the model performed with 90% accuracy- which google team calls "human specialist”, but more than one-fifth of the images were rejected by the AI because the AI only recognizes the good quality images. This problem is related to data generalization, the AI model in the lab was trained and tested on good high-quality images, whereas in real life it was tested on both good and poor quality images.

Integrating the AI systems into the medical practice will build the a mutually beneficial relationship between AI and Medicine. In future, where AI will offer the greater efficiency or cost-effectiveness and Doctors (or Medical Staff) will offer AI the essential medical exposure of complex cases. In this process, it will be necessary to ensure that AI does not hide the human face of medicine, because the biggest obstacle to AI’s adoption will be the public’s hesitation to embrace this technology.  
 
 
